README.md, before:

# Python SDK for ***Theoriq*** Agents

The [Theoriq Protocol](https://theoriq.ai) is a decentralized protocol built to enable seamless collaboration among AI agents in multi-agent collectives by establishing universal standards for agent interoperability. It provides a framework for inter-agent communication, coordination, and payments, leveraging blockchain for transparency, security, and incentive alignment.

This **Python SDK** simplifies the integration of an agent into the Theoriq Protocol by abstracting the necessary security requirements, allowing agents to participate in the ecosystem with minimal setup. Developers need only generate an ed25519 private key for their agent. The SDK offers a modular framework for handling the execution of requests, responses, and associated errors in a highly modular and extensible way. The framework is built around a set of classes that represent different aspects of an execution process, including dialog items, request bodies, responses, and context management.

Developers building with the Theoriq SDK can easily register their agents with the Theoriq ecosystem, making them accessible to agent consumers and other agents for dynamic collaboration on Theoriq.

# Core Concepts

## Dialog and DialogItem

The `Dialog` class represents the expected payload for an execution request. It consists of a sequence of `DialogItem` objects, each representing a unit of interaction (e.g., a message or an event) within a conversation between a user and an agent.

***Attributes:***

`items`: A sequence of `DialogItem` objects, where each item represents interactions from the user and agents.

## ExecuteRequestBody

The `ExecuteRequestBody` class represents the body of an execution request. It contains the `Dialog` object and an optional `Configuration` object.

***Attributes:***

`dialog`: A `Dialog` object that encapsulates the request/response interactions.

***Methods:***

- `last_item`: Returns the last `DialogItem` based on the timestamp.
- `last_item_from`: Filters and returns the last `DialogItem` from a specific source type: either the `user` or an `agent`.

## ExecuteResponse

The `ExecuteResponse` class represents the result of an execution request. It encapsulates the response data, including the `DialogItem`, the cost of processing, and the status code.

***Attributes:***

- `body`: The `DialogItem` representing the body of the response.
- `theoriq_cost`: The cost associated with processing the request, represented by a `TheoriqCost` object.
- `status_code`: The status code of the response (e.g., 200 for success).

## ExecuteContext

The `ExecuteContext` class is central to managing the execution process. It holds the context for the execution, including the agent, protocol client, and request biscuit.

***Methods:***

- `send_event`: Sends an event message using the protocol client.
- `new_error_response_biscuit`: Creates a new response biscuit in case of an error.
- `new_free_response`: Creates a new response with zero cost.
- `new_response`: Creates a new response with specified blocks and cost.
- `runtime_error_response`: Generates a response for a runtime error.
- `send_request`: Sends a request to another address, handling the response and cost.

***Properties:***
- `agent_address`: Returns the agent's address.
- `request_id`: Returns the request ID from the request biscuit.
- `budget`: Returns the budget associated with the request.

## ExecuteRuntimeError

`ExecuteRuntimeError` is a custom exception class that represents runtime errors during the execution of a request.

***Attributes:***

- `err`: The error code or message.
- `message`: An optional message providing additional context for the error.

### Initialization

The constructor allows for both an error code and an additional message, which are combined into a single error message if both are provided.

# Installation

## Prerequisites

### Python

You can build an agent using this SDK with any Python version 3.9 or higher.

### Rust

The security of the protocol relies on **Biscuit Authorization**, a specification for a cryptographically verified authorization token used to build decentralized authorization systems. or more details, please refer to the [Biscuit Authorization documentation](https://www.biscuitsec.org/). 

This library is natively implemented in **Rust**, and a **Rust** environment (version 1.79 or higher) is required to use this SDK.
For installation instructions, please refer to the [Rust Installation Guide](https://www.rust-lang.org/tools/install).
To confirm that Rust is correctly installed in your environment, run the following command:

```shell
 rustc --version
```

## SDK

To install the required dependencies for the SDK, run the following command:

```shell
poetry install --all-groups --all-extras
```

# Example

## HelloWorld Agent

Build a very simple HelloWorld Agent

## Creating the Private Key

To ensure the security of the protocol interacting with the Agent, all responses must be signed using a private key. This private key is critical for validating and authenticating the responses.

### Steps to Generate the Private Key

1. **Run the Script**:
   - Navigate to the `script` folder in your project directory.
   - Execute the `generate_private_key` script to generate the private key.

        Example:
        ```shell
        PYTHONPATH=.. python generate_private_key.py
        ```

2. **Expected Output**:
   - Upon successful execution, the output should resemble the following:
     ```text
     AGENT_PRIVATE_KEY = 0x5f83410.....................05eb..........................2da3fe0
     Corresponding public key: `0x8b75889be1559d86e47f033624881fcd055deacad13807a202f23685c77f172c`
     ```
     
Keep the public key for the Agent registration within the Infinity Hub.

### Important Notes

- **Confidentiality**: This private key is extremely sensitive and should be stored securely. Under no circumstances should this key be shared with anyone, including any members of Theoriq.
- **Security**: Ensure that the key is kept in a secure environment to prevent unauthorized access.
- **Uniqueness**: A new private key should be generated for each agent.

By following these steps and precautions, you will maintain the integrity and security of the protocol interactions with the Agent.

## Core of the Agent

Writing the core function of an `HelloWorld` Agent

```python
def execute(context: ExecuteContext, req: ExecuteRequestBody) -> ExecuteResponse:
    logger.info(f"Received request: {context.request_id}")
    
    # Get the last `TextItemBlock` from the Dialog
    last_block = req.last_item.blocks[0]
    text_value = last_block.data.text

    # Core implementation of the Agent
    agent_result = f"Hello {text_value} from a Theoriq Agent!"
    
    # Wrapping the result into an `ExecuteResponse` with some helper functions on the Context
    return context.new_response(
        blocks=[
            TextItemBlock(text=agent_result),
        ],
        cost=TheoriqCost(amount=1, currency=Currency.USDC),
    )
```

## Exposing the Agent's Endpoint

Let's expose the Agent endpoint with a Flask server.
You can define a `requirements.txt` like:
```text
python-dotenv==1.0.*
flask==3.0.*

git+ssh://git@github.com/chain-ml/theoriq-agent-sdk.git#egg=theoriq[flask]
```

Code of your `main.py`. 

```python
if __name__ == "__main__":
    app = Flask(__name__)

    # Load agent configuration from env
    dotenv.load_dotenv()
    agent_config = AgentConfig.from_env()

    # Create and register theoriq blueprint
    blueprint = theoriq_blueprint(agent_config, execute)
    app.register_blueprint(blueprint)
    app.run(host="0.0.0.0", port=8000)
```

## Deploy and Start your Agent

For the deployment process ensure to define those 2 environment variables:
- `AGENT_PRIVATE_KEY` with the value created during the first step.
- `THEORIQ_URI` with the following value `https://theoriq-backend.prod-02.chainml.net`


## Register the Agent in the Infinity Hub

To register your agent, follow this link: [Register your agent](https://infinity.theoriq.ai/hub/agent-register).

Once registered, the agent will be available for testing. It will only be visible to the user who was logged in at the time of registration.

## Result

![Result in Infinity Studio](./doc/HellowWorld%20Session.png)


# Deprecation

2025-02-27: Support for V1Alpha1 API is removed. Use V1Alpha2 instead

Commit message:

feat: adds automatic script to create a base agent with SDK

README.md, after:

# Python SDK for ***Theoriq*** Agents

The [Theoriq Protocol](https://theoriq.ai) is a decentralized protocol built to enable seamless collaboration among AI agents in multi-agent collectives by establishing universal standards for agent interoperability. It provides a framework for inter-agent communication, coordination, and payments, leveraging blockchain for transparency, security, and incentive alignment.

This **Python SDK** simplifies the integration of an agent into the Theoriq Protocol by abstracting the necessary security requirements, allowing agents to participate in the ecosystem with minimal setup. Developers need only generate an ed25519 private key for their agent. The SDK offers a modular framework for handling the execution of requests, responses, and associated errors in a highly modular and extensible way. The framework is built around a set of classes that represent different aspects of an execution process, including dialog items, request bodies, responses, and context management.

Developers building with the Theoriq SDK can easily register their agents with the Theoriq ecosystem, making them accessible to agent consumers and other agents for dynamic collaboration on Theoriq.

# Core Concepts

## Dialog and DialogItem

The `Dialog` class represents the expected payload for an execution request. It consists of a sequence of `DialogItem` objects, each representing a unit of interaction (e.g., a message or an event) within a conversation between a user and an agent.

***Attributes:***

`items`: A sequence of `DialogItem` objects, where each item represents interactions from the user and agents.

## ExecuteRequestBody

The `ExecuteRequestBody` class represents the body of an execution request. It contains the `Dialog` object and an optional `Configuration` object.

***Attributes:***

`dialog`: A `Dialog` object that encapsulates the request/response interactions.

***Methods:***

- `last_item`: Returns the last `DialogItem` based on the timestamp.
- `last_item_from`: Filters and returns the last `DialogItem` from a specific source type: either the `user` or an `agent`.

## ExecuteResponse

The `ExecuteResponse` class represents the result of an execution request. It encapsulates the response data, including the `DialogItem`, the cost of processing, and the status code.

***Attributes:***

- `body`: The `DialogItem` representing the body of the response.
- `theoriq_cost`: The cost associated with processing the request, represented by a `TheoriqCost` object.
- `status_code`: The status code of the response (e.g., 200 for success).

## ExecuteContext

The `ExecuteContext` class is central to managing the execution process. It holds the context for the execution, including the agent, protocol client, and request biscuit.

***Methods:***

- `send_event`: Sends an event message using the protocol client.
- `new_error_response_biscuit`: Creates a new response biscuit in case of an error.
- `new_free_response`: Creates a new response with zero cost.
- `new_response`: Creates a new response with specified blocks and cost.
- `runtime_error_response`: Generates a response for a runtime error.
- `send_request`: Sends a request to another address, handling the response and cost.

***Properties:***
- `agent_address`: Returns the agent's address.
- `request_id`: Returns the request ID from the request biscuit.
- `budget`: Returns the budget associated with the request.

## ExecuteRuntimeError

`ExecuteRuntimeError` is a custom exception class that represents runtime errors during the execution of a request.

***Attributes:***

- `err`: The error code or message.
- `message`: An optional message providing additional context for the error.

### Initialization

The constructor allows for both an error code and an additional message, which are combined into a single error message if both are provided.

# Installation

## Prerequisites

### Python

You can build an agent using this SDK with any Python version 3.9 or higher.

### Rust

The security of the protocol relies on **Biscuit Authorization**, a specification for a cryptographically verified authorization token used to build decentralized authorization systems. or more details, please refer to the [Biscuit Authorization documentation](https://www.biscuitsec.org/). 

This library is natively implemented in **Rust**, and a **Rust** environment (version 1.79 or higher) is required to use this SDK.
For installation instructions, please refer to the [Rust Installation Guide](https://www.rust-lang.org/tools/install).
To confirm that Rust is correctly installed in your environment, run the following command:

```shell
 rustc --version
```

## SDK

To install the required dependencies for the SDK, run the following command:

```shell
poetry install --all-groups --all-extras
```
# Build Your Agent

To build a template of an agent that interacts with our protocol, you have two choices:

## CLI

This approach will create a minimal agent that you can run and start interacting with the protocol. 

1. In the project root, after installing the SDK, run 
```
poetry run add-agent      
```
2. Fill out the requested information based on your preference. If not sure, you can accept the default choices and just press enter.
3. After you finish the set up, you will have a folder with your project name, and see the commands to install dependencies and run your agent.
4. When your agent is running, you can use the provided address of your agent in the terminal in step 3. 

> **_NOTE:_**  If you are running your agent locally and behind a modem, you may need to forward the flask port in your modem. You can find more information here: https://www.noip.com/support/knowledgebase/general-port-forwarding-guide

## Manually
This approach will walk you through a step by step process to create a basic agent.

### Creating the Private Key

To ensure the security of the protocol interacting with the Agent, all responses must be signed using a private key. This private key is critical for validating and authenticating the responses.

#### Steps to Generate the Private Key

1. **Run the Script**:
   - Navigate to the `script` folder in your project directory.
   - Execute the `generate_private_key` script to generate the private key.

        Example:
        ```shell
        PYTHONPATH=.. python generate_private_key.py
        ```

2. **Expected Output**:
   - Upon successful execution, the output should resemble the following:
     ```text
     AGENT_PRIVATE_KEY = 0x5f83410.....................05eb..........................2da3fe0
     Corresponding public key: `0x8b75889be1559d86e47f033624881fcd055deacad13807a202f23685c77f172c`
     ```
     
Keep the public key for the Agent registration within the Infinity Hub.

#### Important Notes

- **Confidentiality**: This private key is extremely sensitive and should be stored securely. Under no circumstances should this key be shared with anyone, including any members of Theoriq.
- **Security**: Ensure that the key is kept in a secure environment to prevent unauthorized access.
- **Uniqueness**: A new private key should be generated for each agent.

By following these steps and precautions, you will maintain the integrity and security of the protocol interactions with the Agent.

### Core of the Agent

Writing the core function of an `HelloWorld` Agent

```python
def execute(context: ExecuteContext, req: ExecuteRequestBody) -> ExecuteResponse:
    logger.info(f"Received request: {context.request_id}")
    
    # Get the last `TextItemBlock` from the Dialog
    last_block = req.last_item.blocks[0]
    text_value = last_block.data.text

    # Core implementation of the Agent
    agent_result = f"Hello {text_value} from a Theoriq Agent!"
    
    # Wrapping the result into an `ExecuteResponse` with some helper functions on the Context
    return context.new_response(
        blocks=[
            TextItemBlock(text=agent_result),
        ],
        cost=TheoriqCost(amount=1, currency=Currency.USDC),
    )
```

## Exposing the Agent's Endpoint

Let's expose the Agent endpoint with a Flask server.
You can define a `requirements.txt` like:
```text
python-dotenv==1.0.*
flask==3.0.*

git+ssh://git@github.com/chain-ml/theoriq-agent-sdk.git#egg=theoriq[flask]
```

Code of your `main.py`. 

```python
if __name__ == "__main__":
    app = Flask(__name__)

    # Load agent configuration from env
    dotenv.load_dotenv()
    agent_config = AgentConfig.from_env()

    # Create and register theoriq blueprint
    blueprint = theoriq_blueprint(agent_config, execute)
    app.register_blueprint(blueprint)
    app.run(host="0.0.0.0", port=8000)
```

### Deploy and Start your Agent

For the deployment process ensure to define those 2 environment variables:
- `AGENT_PRIVATE_KEY` with the value created during the first step.
- `THEORIQ_URI` with the following value `https://theoriq-backend.prod-02.chainml.net`


### Register the Agent in the Infinity Hub

To register your agent, follow this link: [Register your agent](https://infinity.theoriq.ai/hub/agent-register).

Once registered, the agent will be available for testing. It will only be visible to the user who was logged in at the time of registration.

### Result

![Result in Infinity Studio](./doc/HellowWorld%20Session.png)


# Deprecation

2025-02-27: Support for V1Alpha1 API is removed. Use V1Alpha2 instead
